# Ben's Flight Blog

To keep myself honest, I've decided to keep my personal notes from each flight I take in a blog, which everyone can see. Hopefully, this will get me in the habit of writing something up every time I take the air. It will also let me share some of the things I learn and formalize my process. Finally, it will serve as the fourth copy of all of my flight info (Behind my official logbook, my in-flight notebook, and ForeFlight on my iPad.)

At the end of each month, entries for that month will be moved to a new page for that month's archive. This is just to keep each page a reasonable size.

## Index:

- [September 2020](sept-20.html)
- [October 2020](oct-20.html)
- [November 2020](nov-20.html)
- [December 2020](dec-20.html)
- [January 2020](jan-20.html)

## Flight 25: February 17, 2021
Took the afternoon off of work to go flying today, because Andrew had a conflict this Saturday. Had an excellent short flight, possibly my best yet in terms of not getting behind the airplane and following the proper procedure in the pattern. Easily my best landings at Palo Alto. And surprisingly, I wasn't really put off by the headwind encounter like I was last week. We had originally intended to head over to Reid-Hillview for some crosswind practice, but we got stuck on the ground for a while waiting for the fuel truck, so we ended up staying in the pattern at Palo Alto. The pattern at Palo Alto is a weird one, but it will also be my home airport once I am flying on my own (first as a solo student pilot and later as the holder of a newly minted PPL [I hope at least]). So it was good to get some practice. 
Overall, I did a much much better job of controlling the airplane than last saturday, which was one of my worse sessions. And Palo Alto is not really a beginner airport. So that makes me happy. I still didn't do everything perfect, and in fact there were a few things I did wrong several times. The first and biggest mistake I was making regularly was turning final early (undershooting the turn), which cuts into the time we spend in the descent on final. That time on final is important to us as pilots because it's time we can use to study our sink rate and crosswind inputs. I got progressively better at that throughout the session. When we have headwinds on base, we need to turn even later than we think we do. And the turn base is a medium steepness turn. Another mistake I was making around the base area was not crabbing enough at the end of the turn base. I needed to be aiming for a more than 90 degree turn base to get us on a crab heading but didn't always do so. My crosswind turn was surprisingly okay, maybe tending to be a little steep at first. The Palo Alto crosswind turn is also strange. The noise abatement turn followed by a continuous crosswind to downwind turn is weird to get used to. Finally, I also made two mistakes in the flare. First, I was tending to flare a little high, but I was correcting for that pretty well. Second, I was releasing the backpressure on the flare too early. The drag from the flare attitude does a lot of the work of slowing down the airplane. I think maybe more than the brakes.
We got lots of practice with slow flight and being told to do weird things by the tower. That was good for me to learn what to do. My slow flight has gotten much better. I am not losing altitude on the entry as much any more. We also practiced slow flight at both 20 degrees and 30 degrees of flaps. That was interesting too. My radio communication was also solid. My approaches especially on final were stable. Sometimes I would oscillate above and below the glideslope a bit, but I was usually able to get the trim correct. Later on, we did a few no-flaps landings. We talked about how when on long-final for no flaps landing, you should be going faster than usual (approx 80 kt with power 1500 and nose on the VASI). This is because with less drag, if you want to slow to 65, you need to be in near a flare attitude while flying. Then, you pull power idle and start nosing up, in order to dissipate the energy of the airplane. If necessary, you can add power to drag the airplane to the runway. But we err on the side of pulling power early, because we can always add power (assuming no engine failure) but it is hard to dissipate extra energy with no flaps. 

## Flight 24: February 13, 2021
Had an interesting flight today. Intended to meet up at 9:00, then moved that to 9:30 during the week. Then, there was a bit of heavy rain (from the leaving cold front) around 9 and we delayed to 10. Then, it turned out the airplane wasn't even ready until 10:15 anyways. We did our weather briefing and saw lots of wind. As of the time of our briefing, we saw winds 280/11 at San Jose, and 290/12 at Palo Alto. Predictions looked bleak as well: 300/15G22 at 1900Z and 300/16G24 at 2100. After that, we checked E16, and saw 310/14G22. Decided to head that way even though the weather prognosis wasn't looking good. We planned to listen to the ASOS as soon as possible and make a final decision then. During the preflight, we noticed that the condition of the airplane 4660G has continued to deteriorate - nosewheel appears to be losing hydraulic fluid really quickly. It was bottoming out when going over the bumps created by airport construction. Also, there was not much of an RPM drop on the carb heat during the run-up. I made a mistake at the end of the run up, forgot to lean the airplane aggressively, and as a result of that, ended up taking off with mixture partial (an instant failure on the checkride). We also talked about the procedure for diversions, with the plan being to practice one on the way over (if necessary).
We did our normal left-downwind departure, towards San Martin. Lots of winds immediately evident. We started to head out towards Pruneyard, continually correcting for wind. Another mistake I made was not having the radio tuned to NorCal approach early enough. Even though I had time to fly before actually dealing with the calls, I should have had the frequency on standby so I could just click the one button and switch to the frequency. I need to keep working on proper crab angle and course correction during cruise. Eventually (pretty soon hopefully) I will need to be able to do this autonomously without Andrew's help. Working on that. We decided to divert to Reid-Hillview after listening to the ASOS. Winds were too much to be constructive for us. The diversion went pretty well. I did the slow flight without losing any altitude which was good. Then, I was able to operate the GPS pretty well, with only a little bit of help. I plugged in RHV and switched the CDI to show the extended centerline with the OBS mode. Headed over that way. At that moment, Andrew pulled the power and we did a simulated engine failure. I chose a reasonable field, got to it, and did the starting checklist. However, I misinterpreted the altimeter and thought I had an extra thousand feet, which meant that instead of doing a full orbit, I needed to just enter downwind. I did so, but I was only about 700 feet above the ground. I turned base early and was able to make the "runway". Unfortunately, I would have failed because I didn't do any of the necessary communication. If I had read the altimeter correctly, it would have been fine, as I would have gone straight to the securing checklist.
After our simulated engine failure, we headed over to Reid-Hillview. The wind was a little better, but not much. We came straight in following the usual procedure (2500 Ft over UTC and Mt. Misery, descend with nose level, use the 321 rule after that, hitting 1500 ft at the tank 3 miles away from the airport). The wind wasn't particularly pleasant to deal with for me. There were 14 knots of wind gusting to 19 (or similar) and although it was mostly along the runway, it was still really hard for me to cope at times. The rectangular course really suffered for it, especially my turing final. And once or twice I flared the ariplane extremely high on short final. That was happening because the headwind really wants to lift the airplane off the ground. I need to work harder on final at pushing the nose down into the right attitude. As previously mentioned, the headwind encounter makes the airplane want to push nose-up. We also talked about Reid-Hillview's (more normal) ground taxiing procedures. We headed back to palo alto and did some patternwork there. In general, I need to do better at just doing things rather than asking about them. I really need to work on my self-confidence.
### Diversion procedures:
1. Configure for slow flight (or at least slower flight), but not too slow.
	- This gives you extra time to deal with whatever is causing the diversion.
	- We used 60 knots because that's not too difficult to manage but also is pretty slow.
Then, ask yourself (and act upon) the following questions:
2. Where am I?
	- Knowing where I am is very important to know where to go.
	- Look out the window and use the GPS. Later, use VORs as well.
3. What is the nature of the diversion?
	- Could be many things. Do I need to pee? Is there bad weather? Am I out of fuel?
4. What is the nearest suitable airport for the diversion?
	- If it's a fuel diversion, it's the closest one.
	- If it's weather related, maybe it's far away. 
	- It depends on what's going on.
5. Determine direction and distance to nearest suitable airport, and act upon it.
	- Use the GPS:
		- NRST page, then activate cursor and select airport.
		- Direct enter enter to choose it
		- CDI button to feed it into CDI
		- OBS button to show extended centerline
6. Determine time and fuel needed to get to that airport
	- Assume 10 gal/hr burn rate
7. Determine remaining fuel on arrival
	- Don't want to land with less than 30 minutes of fuel in the airplane.  

## Ground School: February 10, 2021

First ground school in quite a while, since November I think. Moving on to cover weather now. The FAA wants private pilots to know enough about weather to not launch in dangerous conditions and know how to deal with weather when it is encountered.

### Chapter 6A: Basic Weather Theory

Contrary to popular opinion, we actually fly in what is known as the "atmosphere". The atmosphere, which is about 265,000 feet thick, is a buch of gases which are held close to the surface of the earth by gravity. We fly in the lowest level of the atmosphere, called the troposphere. It is separated froim other levels by something called the tropopause, a boundary below which most of the water vapor in the air is. Some other airplanes my be able to fly in the lower areas of the stratosphere (think U2, with a service ceiling of 70,000 ft). The atmosphere is about 78% nitrogen and 21% oxygen, with some other gases (carbon dioxide, water vapor, etc.) making up the remainder.

Because air is gaseous, it is not stuck in place. It moves throughout the atmosphere in a process called circulation. This circulation is mostly (not entirely) caused by temperature gradients across the world, created by the fact that sunlight is more concentrated at the equator and more diffuse at the polar regions. There are of course three main ways that heat moves (conduction, convection, radiation), but the one that is most relevant here is conduction. Convection is the movement of heat that involves moving masses of air. Because the earth is spinning, there isn't one single convective cell which moves air from the equator towards the poles. Instead, there are many smaller cells. To a first order approximation, there are three cells between the equator and the poles on each of the northern and southern hemispheres. They are called Hadley cells, Ferrel cells, and Polar cells. The boundaries fall roughly at 0 degrees, 30 degrees, and 60 degrees. These boundaries generally speaking are regions of high pressure. Also, generally speaking, high pressure produces clear weather and low pressure is accompanied by inclement weather.

Air pressure is a scalar field covering the whole earth. Air naturally flows down a pressure gradient, from regions of high pressure to regions of low pressure. Because the earth is spinning, and therefore not in an inertial reference frame but instead in an accelerated one, we are subject to the coriolis force. The coriolis force (not really a force) causes seemingly straight trajectories to become curved. The coriolis effect's main implication for our purpose is that high and low regions of pressure are not always distributed exactly at the borders of the convective cells. They are somewhat randomly distributed. Frictional forces, which are the ground dragging against moving masses of air, pull back against movements caused by the coriolis force. When descending from high altitudes, it is normal to experience changes in wind due to the effect of frictional forces close to the ground.

The three-cell pattern we have discussed causes prevailing wind patterns which are usually present. In the northern hemisphere, those winds tend to come from the north and in the southern hemisphere they come from the south. The east/west direction switches based on latitude. Between 0 and 30 degrees, the winds are northeasterly, between 30 and 60 they are westerly, and above 60, they are easterly. The reverse is true in the southern hemisphere. Those winds have implications on sail-based navigation.

In addition to global wind patterns, there are also local wind patterns. As the name suggests, local wind patterns are wind patterns that are localized to a specific region. They may overpower global patterns in specific regions. There are a few types of local wind patterns. Sea breezes are caused during the day when warm, sparse air over the land warms quicker than air over the sea or ocean, and the high-pressure air flows inland. Then as air is heated over the land, it rises, and is pushed back out to sea as warmer air. That warmer air cools and sinks. There are updrafts over the ground and downdrafts over the air. At night, the exact opposite process happens, because now the air is warmer over the ocean than the land. These differences occur because of how much latent heat water has. Valley breezes and mountain breezes have the same effect, but in a different place. As air on the top of mountains is warmed quickly by the sun, the cooler low lying air flows up the mountain. The opposite happens as air cools quickly at night on the tops of mountains. An even more dramatic version of the mountain and valley winds are called katabatic winds. Katabatic winds are caused by cold downslope winds flowing over mountains and creating downdrafts. The same thing can also happen with warm downslope winds branching off of strong winds coming over mountains. One example of this that we deal with here in California are Santa Ana winds from the desert. We also experience Diablo winds from the Sierra Nevada.

### Chapter 6B: Weather Patterns

Weather, speaking at a high level, is caused by variations in temperature, pressure, and moisture over different spaces. Lots of different weather patterns have various effects. We went through some of them in detail and others less so. And there are hundreds more than are covered in this book. 

Atmospheric stability is a term we use to describe the atmosphere's resistance (or lack thereof) to vertical movement of air. In stable environments, there is not very much vertical movement of air. In less stable environments, convective forces are stronger and air moves up and down. This turbulence causes clouds and weather. When air moves up and down, pressure acting on the air changes, and the air is compressed or expands. Resulting temperature changes are due to adiabatic heating or cooling. Notably, the meaining of the word "adiabatic" is in fact relevant (probably why they named it as such). The air is heated without any actual transfer of heat, only through work. The amount of water vapor in the air has an impact on the stability of that air. Water vapor is less dense than other gases in air, and so air that contains a lot of water vapor is also less stable. Water vapor also has a very high latent heat. This ability to store energy translates into ability to create weather. Temperature inversions occur when, for some reason, warm air lies above cold air. Temperature inversions act as a "lid", pushing air down on another air mass, potentially containing fog, smoke, and other stuff. High pressure days give airplanes extra performance (in terms of ability to generate lift and power), and also tend to trap haze and smoke and stuff.

When water absorbs and releases this latent heat, it goes through phase changes. Those phase changes can be normal (like melting and freezing, evaporation and condensation), or they can be less normal (like sublimation and deposition). The important point is that the latent heat of water is a very large amount of energy. We measure this amount of water in one of two ways - relative humidity and absolute humidity. Absolute humidity is simply the amount of water per unit volume of air. Relative humidity is the absolute humidity as a proportion of how much water the air can absorb without becoming completely saturated. We use the measurement of relative humidity because it more closely matches our human experience. Fun note is that absolute humidity is not related to precipitation. Places like far northern Alaska have relatively high relative humidities (and may experience frequent snow), but since they have such low temperatures, there is actually less moisture in the air than there is in warmer deserts.

Dew and frost are formed on surfaces by condensation and deposition, respectively. They occur when the temperature hits the dew point. The dew point is the temperature at which, for a given absolute humidity, the relative humidity is 100%. The dew point is obtained with a wet bulb thermometer. We can use the dew point to calculate roughly the cloud base. That brings us to clouds. Clouds are large, well, clouds of condensed water which, roughly speaking, form around bits of dust which we call "condensation nuclei". Clouds contain lots of latent heat, because they are lots of water. Fog is a low-lying cloud, for our purposes, defined as being within 50 feet of the ground. There are several types of fog. Advection fog, which is created by low layers of warm, moist air moving over a cool surface, is also known as marine layer. Upslope fog forms when moist, stable air flows up a sloping landmass. This is also known as valley fog. Steam fog is generated when cold, dry air moves over warm ater. This is the steam that we see over Lake Michigan in the winter months. Other low clouds are generally types of stratus clouds - stratus, nimbostratus, or stratocumulus. They are low lying, sheet-like clouds. Middle-lying clouds generally are altostratus or altocumulus. High clouds are cirrus, cirrostratus, or cirrocumulus. There are also clouds with vertical development, which may extend through various levels. Those include cumulus and cumulonimbus (thunderstorm) clouds. There are also man-made clouds, called contrails (condensation trails) which come from jet engines.

Precipitation is caused by gravity pulling down on condensed water in clouds. Particles or droplets in the clouds grow in size until they are too big to be held in suspension. Then it rains, or whatever. Rains and drizzles are caused when the dew point is above freezing. When the dew point is below freezing, ice pellets or snow can fall. A type of precipitation uniquely associatedwith thunderstorms is called hail. Hail is caused by a convective cell (thunderstorm) rapidly raising and lowering droplets until they freeze and grow, and fall as hailstones.

An air mass is exactly what it sounds like. A bunch of flowing air. There are some large-scale common air masses that we deal with in the US. They all fit into a 2x2 matrix - polar or tropical, and maritime or continental. Polar means cold, while tropical means warm. Maritime means moist, while continental means dry. Maritime tropical air masses and continental polar (and maritime polar) masses meet in the midwest, which creates thunderstorms and also tornadoes. Tornadoes are extreme centers of low pressure. When continental polar air masses move over warm great lakes, the air in clouds gets warmer and more moist. After the clouds pass over the lakes and back onto the ground, they dump lake effect snow onto the surrounding areas. One thing that we get in the sacramento valley is warm moist air moving in from the ocean and mixing with cooler air over the land, and creating large regions of stratus or valley fog.

A front is a boundary between two air masses. Fronts are differences between hot/cold, dry/moist, and high-pressure/low-pressure air. These fronts create weather, which we call "frontal weather". A cold front is caused by fast-moving masses of cold air into a more stable warm region. These cold fronts create rapidly rising updrafts of warm air, and the resulting lifting action creates cumulonimbus clouds, and therefore frequently thunderstorms. Those thunderstorms and associated weather usually happen exactly at the border of the front. They are also usually over quickly, and are associated with clear visibility and short periods of intense precipitation. Warm fronts are similar. But they have a couple of differences. They create mostly stratus clouds, and create clouds along the whole boundary. They generally create longer, less intense weather. It's possible for warm fronts to extend the whole east coast, and stick around for days at a time. Cold fronts usually don't create IFR weather other than during the exact time of precipitation. Stationary fronts are two air masses that stay next to each other without much movement. Occluded fronts are essentially caused when a warm front and a cold front hit each other, in an interaction between three air masses: cold, cool, and warm. They frequently cause thunderstorms to become embedded between the two fronts and end up with the worst of both worlds - thunderstorms and long-lasting rain.

### Chapter 6C: Weather Hazards

We only spent a few minutes on this chapter. More next week. Thunderstorms are convective cells that create lots of rain and lightning (and therefore thunder), and sometimes also hail. They are dangerous to fly in. Even airliners need to divert around them. They may be associated with massive updrafts and downdrafts. They have three phases - cumulus/lifting, mature, and dissipating. The cumulus stage is when the lifting action is creating clouds and with them, strong updrafts. The mature stage is when the cumulonimbus's strong anvil shape is in full, and there are downdrafts around the cloud. There is also precipitation. In the dissipating stage, the cloud starts to dissipate, from the bottom up. There may  still be rain and hail. Microbursts are an extremely strong downdraft which are usually found near thunderstorms, but not always. 

If you fly into a thunderstorm, you should do a few things. You should slow down to the indicated maneuvering speed of the airplane. This will ensure that the airplane will not break up, causing immediate death. There will be strong up and downdrafts. You should not attempt to hold altitude. You should attempt to hold some reasonable attitude (for a climb or level flight), and let the up/downdrafts do what they will. Hopefully you are high enough not to be smacked into the ground. You should fly straight, for two reasons. First, because you may not know which direction the end of the thunderstorm is, and second, because turning imposes a load factor on the airplane. 


## Flight 23: February 3, 2020
Short update today from a short (ish) flight. Met up at 9am, planning to head over to San Martin for some patternwork (which I've been doing a lot of). When we launched, wind seemed reasonable at E16:320/7kt. But when we launched, we found that winds had changed to 320/17g22. 17 gusting to 22 wasn't gonna work for us. It's a little weird for the wind to be picking up that early in the day, but it's okay. We diverted to Watsonville, going over the mountains. Spent a while in the pattern at Watsonville. My landings were mostly really good. A couple were flat, but all of them were really soft. Andrew asked if I wanted to solo, but I wasn't really feeling ready, so I didn't. In general though, the pattern needed work. I was constantly spending time correcting for mistakes I was making throughout the rectangular course, which makes it more difficult to actually do the things I needed to do. The most common mistakes I was making were 1- undershooting the turn to final, and then having to correct for that through the descent, and 2- diving the plane during turns base and final, instead of holding the nose up as is necessary. In any case, the real issue I am having right now is just one of confidence. I don't really know what's going on with that but I will have to figure it out. We spent some time in the pattern at Palo Alto on our way back, with some real crosswinds. Doing crosswind adjustment is always fun, and the first couple weren't so good. The last few ended up being solid though. Crosswind experience is just something i lack. Another problem I am having is looking at instruments too much. I might end up having to cover them entirely.



